Think you can’t bake fresh, homemade sourdough bread?
This easy sourdough bread recipe—trusted by beginner bakers for over a decade—shows you how, step-by-step.
No yeast.
No kneading.
No noise.
Just simple ingredients and 10 minutes hands on time for soft, crisp sourdough bread at home.
Reader review
“I have tried MULTIPLE sourdough bread recipes and this one has been the very first to make a successful (fully risen) loaf of bread. I am relatively new to sourdough and for some reason, the other recipes just didn’t produce good bread. These instructions and detailed explanations really make a huge difference to someone who is new to the world of sourdough.”
—Savannah
To anyone who thinks their sourdough bread isn’t good enough, I get it.
Back in 2013, I set a goal: bake more bread.
I tested, failed, succeeded (and tried again).
What began with an easy no-knead artisan loaf eventually led to the holy grail: homemade sourdough bread.
Admittedly, I had beginner’s luck.
My early loaves were light, plump and airy, everything you want sourdough to be!
And then?
Down the rabbit hole I went: Hydration?
Baker’s %?
Proofing times?
Now, with 13+ years baking experience and a professional culinary background, I know what holds people back: the confusion, hesitation, comparison.
I teach from a straight forward practical perspective because sourdough is not just a written recipe; it’s an understanding.
This recipe has been the most popular on my blog for over a decade- millions of views and the inspiration behind my bestselling book Artisan Sourdough Made Simple, a deeper dive into sourdough bread recipes.
So, if you’re at the end of your rope (and just want to make good bread), you’ve made it.
Welcome to the journey.
What Sets My Recipe Apart:
- One bowl, 5 ingredients
- Olive oil = soft, plush crumb & crisp, golden crust
- No stand mixer
- No bread machine
- Flexible baker’s schedule
- Personalized support in the comments
But before we make bread, let’s discuss what drives it: your sourdough starter.
Once you understand what it is, and how it works, your path will be crystal clear.
Have questions?
Ask in the comment section.
I respond with personalized help.
Where To Get A Sourdough Starter
A sourdough starter is a live fermented culture of flour and water.
It naturally leavens bread dough without commercial yeast.
There are all different types: homemade, purchased or gifted (ask a fellow baker!).
I use two different starters at home: one I made myself, and a vibrant Australian starter gifted from my friend Celia.
But is doesn’t stop there.
Once your have a starter, it must be kept alive and well with regular feedings to maintain its rising power.
Sourdough is not static; it’s a living process.
Here’s my personal feeding schedule which you can adapt to suit your style:
How To Feed Sourdough Starter
- Remove and discard half of your sourdough starter
- Feed what’s left in the jar with equal parts flour and water by weight (1:1:1 feeding ratio).
- Let rise at room temperature (loosely covered or airtight) ideally 75+F until bubbly, active and double in size (2-12 hrs).
I use this sourdough starter jar.
Recommended Reading: Feeding Sourdough Starter: My Best Tips & Tricks
When Is Sourdough Starter Ready To Use?
Your fed starter is ready to use when it’s bubbly, active and doubles in size.
This can take 2-12 hours or more depending on the temperature and strength of your starter.
My best advice?
Be patient, plan ahead, and make sure your starter is in a warm spot (ideally 75 F).
The process is not instant.
Float Test: If you’re unsure whether your starter is ready, drop 1 tsp at peak height into a glass of water.
If it floats to the top it’s ready to use.
If it sinks, feed your starter again.
Storing Your Starter
Most people don’t realize that your feeding schedule is directly related to your baking preferences.
If you only bake a few times a month, store your starter in the fridge and feed it once a week.
If you bake often, store it at room temperature and feed it once a day.
How To Make Sourdough Bread: Step-By-Step Recipe
To Start: Feed your starter until it’s bubbly and active first (remember this can take anywhere from 2-12 hours, so plan ahead).
Then mix the dough.
Detailed instructions follow below.
For a printable recipe & sample baking schedule, scroll to the end.
Step 1: Mix The Dough
- Add water, sourdough starter, and olive oil to a large bowl.
Whisk well to combine, making sure the starter is fully dissolved.
Then add the bread flour and salt.
Continue mixing (I use a fork at this point) until the flour is absorbed.
The dough will feel rough and shaggy, which is normal.
- Cover the bowl and let rest (autolyse) for 30 minutes to 1 hour at room temperature.
Then shape the dough into a rough ball (it doesn’t have to look perfect).
Tip: Weigh your ingredient with a digital kitchen scale.
Measuring cups vary in size and don’t account for ingredient density which can lead to dry, dense, or overly sticky dough.
Why Autolyse Matters
Autolyse is the first rest after mixing bread dough.
It jumpstarts gluten development without kneading, making the dough stronger, stretchier, and easier to shape I never skip it.
For this recipe, rest for at least 30-45 minutes (or when time permits, I’ll do 1 hour for an even softer, more manageable dough).
To learn more about common sourdough bread terms read my Sourdough Baking Glossary.
I’ve included the only 12 you need to know!
A Note on Salt: Some bakers only add salt after autolyse, believing it slows down gluten development.
I’ve followed that method for years, but now mix everything at once.
It’s simpler, faster, and still makes excellent loaves (plus, you won’t forget to add the salt later on!).
I’ll leave the choice up to you.
Want To Add Inclusions?
Mix in flavor additions after autolyse, when the dough is softer and more pliable.
This is another reason not to skip the autolyse step.
Alternatively, inclusions can be added during the first stretch and fold.
A few ideas:
- Roasted garlic
- Chopped olives
- Fresh or dried herbs (rosemary, thyme)
- Seed or nuts
- Cheese
- Dried fruit (raisins, cranberries)
- Jalapeños
Step 2: Bulk Rise
Now the dough is ready to rise.
Cover the bowl with lightly oiled plastic wrap so the dough doesn’t stick to the top, or transfer to a dough tub.
Let rise at room temperature, about 68-70 F (20-21 C).
How Long Does It Take For Sourdough Bread To Rise?
The dough is ready when it’s puffy, slightly domed and nearly double in size.
This can take 3-12 hours depending on room temperature, the quantity and strength of your sourdough starter, and seasonal conditions.
All variables work together.
See my example below:
For My Sourdough Bread Recipe (with ~150 g sourdough starter):
- In the summer: ~2-4 hours @ 80 F (26 C)
- In the winter: ~10-12 hours @ 68 F (20 C)
Diving Deeper: Temperature controls time.
This is where I see the majority of beginner baker’s make mistakes- the temperature is overlooked.
Sourdough takes longer to rise than yeasted bread, and it’s highly dependent on your specific environment.
My kitchen might be 75 F. Yours?
68 F. Watch the dough, not the clock.
For more details and troubleshooting read my companion article: Why Won’t My Sourdough Bread Rise?
Stretch And Fold The Dough (Optional Step)
About 30 minutes into the bulk rise, you can perform a series of “stretch & folds” to strengthen the bread dough.
This step is not mandatory; however it has the potential to add height and structure to the finished loaf.
Check out my how to stretch and fold sourdough guide to learn more, step-by-step.
It’s easy and fun to do!
Step 3: Divide & Shape The Dough
At this stage, remove the dough onto a lightly floured surface.
For two smaller loaves, divide the dough in half.
For a single, standard size loaf leave it whole.
How To Shape A Round Sourdough Boule (Loaf)
Starting at the top, fold the dough over toward the center.
Give it a slight turn, and then fold over the next section of dough.
Repeat until you have come full circle to form a tight round.
This creates surface tension for better oven spring.
You can also try the envelope-style fold.
Tip: I used to get so nervous when shaping bread dough because you only had one chance to get it right.
So intuitively, I would practice using a piece of Play-Doh or with a kitchen towel to go through the motions at my own pace.
Step 4: Choose The Right Baking Pot
If you want bakery-style results, bake sourdough bread in a Dutch oven.
Why?
Pots trap steam which is the secret to homemade sourdough with bold rise and golden crust.
Without steam, the crust will set too fast casing the loaf to harden, split or bake unevenly (I’ve been there and it’s not pretty).
What If You Don’t Have A Dutch Oven?
You’ll need another oven-safe pot with a lid to create steam.
It must be able to withstand up to 450 F/232 C (lid and handles included).
A few options:
- Enamel roasting pan with lid (or sheet pan to cover)
- Cast iron skillet with upside down roasting pan to cover
- Covered sandwich loaf pans
- Clay Baker or Romertopf (soaked first)
- Preheated baking stone w/ metal bowl to cover
Here’s what happened to me: I tried the “no pot” baking route in the past, using just about everything from pizza stones, to baking sheets with no luck!
The crust always hardened too quickly.
Then I tried various steaming methods to remedy this (e.g. ice cubes in a hot pan, spraying my loaves with water) but my personal oven could not retain enough moisture.
The environment was always too dry.
For me, using a Dutch oven was the only reliable solution that worked with consistent results.
Step 5: Second Rise (Proofing)
- After shaping, your dough needs to rise again.
To do so, generously dust the bottom of your Dutch oven with cornmeal, or line with non-stick parchment paper to prevent sticking.
Gently place the dough inside (see tip below)
- Let the dough rise for 30 minutes to 1 hour, or until it’s visibly puffy and no longer feels dense.
It doesn’t need to double in size.
While the dough proofs, preheat your oven to 450 F (232 C).
Tip: Want better shape and structure?
Proof the dough in a cloth-lined, 8-inch bowl or banneton instead of directly in the Dutch oven.
This will contain the dough and hold its shape without spreading.
Step 6: Score The Dough
- Right before the dough goes into the oven, make a shallow slash down the center of the dough, about 2-3 inches long.
Use a sharp serrated knife, paring knife or bread lame.
This lets the steam escape, and allows the bread to “bloom” or expand in the oven.
- Admittedly, this step is a bit nerve racking, so I don’t want to gloss over it.
Be quick and confident.
I’ll share what my sourdough mentor told me: “Slash with panache!”
Step 7: Bake The Bread
You’re at the finish line now!
Bake on the center rack (lid on) for 20 minutes.
Then remove the lid.
Your bread will look pale and slightly shiny.
Then finish baking (uncovered) for 40 minutes or until the crust is deep golden brown.
The internal temperature should be 205-210 F/96-98 C.
Tip: During the last 10 minutes of baking, crack open the oven door to let the moisture out.
This creates a crispier crust.
Or, remove the bread from the pot and bake directly on the oven rack.
The latter creates the crispiest finish.
Step 8: Cool & Slice
Cool the bread on a wire rack for at least 1 hour before slicing.
Be patient!
If you cut into it too soon, the texture will be damp and gummy.
Life’s too short for sub par bread.
Final Thoughts
There are a gazillion sourdough bread recipes out there.
No two loaves look alike.
Start with this guide, master the basics and then branch out: try my golden sourdough focaccia recipe, this easy sourdough sandwich bread, or my one-bowl sourdough pancakes for breakfast!
Once you have a few loaves under your belt, the process will become an imminent rhythm and you’ll become a sourdough pro in no time.
Sourdough Baking Schedule
- Friday Evening: Feed your starter, cover the jar, and leave it on the counter overnight.
If you keep your starter in the fridge, it might need two feedings to perk back up (feed it in the morning & in the evening).
- Saturday Morning: Check your starter: if it’s alive and bubbling, you can make the dough to rise during the day.
Or, feed it again in the afternoon to make the dough in the evening for an overnight rise.
Remember to use the float test mentioned above to make sure your starter is ready to use.
- Saturday Morning/Evening (or whenever your starter is ready): Make the dough.
Leave on the counter to bulk rise at room temperature.
In the summer, if your dough rises quickly and you’re not ready to bake, cover the whole bowl with lightly oiled wrap and chill until ready to use.
- Sunday Morning: cut and shape the dough.
Place in Dutch oven for second rise.
Slash.
Bake.
Cool.
Eat.
By signing up, you agree to receive emails from The Clever Carrot.
Unsubscribe at any time.
Sourdough Bread: A Beginner’s Guide
- Prep Time: 13 hours
- Cook Time: 1 hour
- Total Time: 14 hours
- Yield: 1 loaf 1x
- Category: Sourdough Bread Recipes
- Method: Oven-Baked
- Cuisine: American
- Diet: Vegan
Description
New to sourdough?
This easy beginner sourdough bread recipe makes the best artisan-style loaf at home with just 5 simple ingredients: bread flour, active sourdough starter, water, salt and olive oil—my signature addition—known for creating a light, plush crumb and a crisp golden crust.
Follow my clear, step-by-step instructions and video guidance to bake fresh sourdough bread with confidence (even on your first try!).
Ingredients
- 150g bubbly, active sourdough starter
- 250g warm water (see Note 2)
- 25g olive oil
- 500g bread flour (not all purpose flour)
- 10g fine sea salt
- fine ground cornmeal or non-stick parchment paper
Notes, Tips & Equipment
- For best results, please weigh your ingredients using a digital scale.
Because measuring cups vary in size and shape, they are not accurate for bread baking.
You want the flour to water ratio to be correct!
- For a more soft and pliable dough, you can increase the water up to 300 g- 325 g total.
Please use a cloth lined bowl or proofing basket (instead of the Dutch oven) for the second rise.
- You will need a 5 1/2 or 6 quart Dutch oven for baking
- This recipe was tested with King Arthur Bread Flour, Gold Medal Bread Flour, Pillsbury Bread Flour
Instructions
Make The Dough
In a large bowl, add the sourdough starter, water and olive oil.
Mix with a fork to combine.
Add the flour and salt.
Continue mixing with your fork until the dough becomes stiff.
Then squish everything together with your hands to incorporate all of the flour.
The dough will be dry and shaggy.
Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, reusable wrap or a clean, very damp kitchen towel.
Let rest (autolyse) for 30 minutes or up to 1 hour, if preferred.
After the dough has rested: return to the bowl and work the dough into a rough ball, about 15 seconds.
Note: For the dough, I’ve given a range in water quantity (see ingredient list above).
If using 250 g of water, the texture at this stage will be quite dry and stiff.
If using an increased amount of water, approximately 300-325 g, the dough will be more wet.
Both textures are normal, depending on which route you take.
Bulk Rise
Cover the bowl with lightly oiled plastic wrap (alternatively, transfer the dough to a high-sided dough tub with lid and measuring marks).
Let rest in a warm spot to rise, ideally 70-75 F. The dough is ready when it no longer looks dense and has almost doubled in size.
Note: The bulk rise time can take anywhere from 3-12 hours depending on the temperature of your ingredients, the potency of your sourdough starter, and your current room temperature.
This will be different for everyone.
For example, in the summer rise times can take anywhere between 2-4 hours @ 80 F/ 26 C whereas in the winter, the dough will take about 10-12 hours @ 68º F/ 20º C. Watch the dough and not the clock.
Optional Step: Stretch & Fold The Dough
During bulk rise, you have the option to perform a series of ‘stretch & folds’ to strengthen the dough.
Start 30-45 minutes into the bulk rise.
Gather a portion of the dough, stretch it upwards and then fold it over itself.
Rotate the bowl ¼ turn and repeat this process until you have come full circle to complete 1 set.
Do this once or twice spaced about 1 hour apart.
Although this step is not mandatory, it has the potential to increase the total volume and height of your bread.
Click here for a step-by-step video tutorial.
Note: Doughs made with 250 g of water vs. 300-325 g of water will feel completely different.
The former will be more stiff; the latter will have more elasticity.
When in doubt, always give the dough extra rest time in between sets if it won’t stretch with ease.
Shape The Dough
Remove the dough from the bowl onto a lightly floured surface.
You do not need to ‘punch down’ the dough; it will gently deflate as you fold and shape it.
To shape: Starting at the top, fold the dough over toward the center.
Give it a slight turn, and then fold over the next section of dough.
Repeat until you have come full circle.
Then flip the dough over and place it seam side down.
Using your hands, gently cup the sides of the dough and rotate it, using quarter turns in a circular motion.
You can also pull it towards you to even out the shape.
Repeat this process until you are happy with its appearance.
Note: When shaping, the idea is for the dough to catch enough surface tension on a non-floured area in order to create a tight ball.
If there is flour present, it will slide around… and drive you nuts.
Second Rise
Now the dough needs to rise again, but for a shorter period of time.
If you’ve used 250g water in your dough, you can do a free form second rise in the Dutch oven (if not, see note directly below).
Coat the bottom of your Dutch oven with cornmeal.
Alternatively, use parchment paper to prevent sticking (this is what I do, now).
Place the dough inside of the pot, cover and let rise for about 30 minutes to 1 hour.
The dough ready when it is slightly puffy but not double in size.
Preheat your oven to 450 F/ 232 C towards the tail end of the second rise.
Note: If your dough contains more than 250g water, omit the free from rise.
Your dough will spread.
You’ll need to do the second rise in a cloth-lined, floured proofing basket instead.
The basket will hold its shape to prevent spreading.
Score The Dough
Right before your bread goes into the oven, make a shallow slash about 2-3 inches long (or more) in the center of the dough.
Use a bread lame, razor blade, sharp paring or a small serrated steak knife.
The cut should be about 1/4-inch deep.
Bake The Dough
Place the bread into the oven on the center rack (lid on) and reduce the temperature to 400° F/ 204° C. Bake for 20 minutes.
Remove the lid, and continue to bake (uncovered) for an additional 40 minutes or until deep, golden brown.
Keep in mind that all ovens are different; you might have to make minimal adjustments to these temperatures.
You can also take the internal temperature of your bread to double check that it is done.
For sourdough, it should read about 205-210º F/ 96-98º C.
Remove the bread from the oven, and cool on a wire rack for at least an hour before slicing.
Don’t cut too soon or else the inside will have a damp and gummy texture.