Skip to Content
Recipe of the Day 
Recipes 
In the Kitchen 
Table Talk 
Holidays & Seasons 
About us
Newsletter
Search 

Recipes
Dinners
Family Dinners
Homemade Pizza & Pizza Dough
Make perfect pizza at home with this pizza recipe, including an easy pizza dough recipe.

By Elise Bauer
Updated April 27, 2025
79 Ratings

Save
Print
Elise Bauer
In This Recipe
Family Pizza Time
The Best Flour for Pizza Dough
How to Check Your Yeast
How to Measure Flour
Proofing the Dough Overnight
Make-Ahead and Freezing
Jump to recipe
What to do when your 8-year-old nephew comes to visit? Make pizza, of course!

Well, not of course, actually. I didn't think of it until we exhausted Sorry, Monopoly, and gin rummy. But it did turn out to be a brilliant idea as my father had just received a baking stone for Christmas, and my nephew loves pizza.

Family Pizza Time
I told him if he helped me make it, I would talk about him on my website, and he would be famous. That seemed to get his attention. He thought the dough was "slimy and gross," but he loved picking his own toppings, and the finished product was "awesome".

Overhead view of a pizza dough recipe and topped with cheese and mushrooms.
Simply Recipes / Annika Panikker
My Favorite Pizza Dough Recipe
The following method I patched together from recipes in both Joy of Cooking and Cook's Illustrated's The Best Recipe. The pizza dough recipe makes enough dough for two 10 to 12-inch pizzas.

Next time, I'll be a bit more patient with stretching out the dough so I can get it even thinner.

The Best Flour for Homemade Pizza Dough
Bread flour is the best flour for homemade pizza dough. You can use all-purpose flour instead of the bread flour called for in the recipe, but bread flour is higher in gluten than all-purpose flour and will make a crispier crust for your pizza.

Side view of a cheesy homemade pizza recipe on a wooden cutting board.
Simply Recipes / Annika Panikker
How To Make Sure Your Yeast Is Active
Pizza dough is a yeasted dough that requires active dry yeast. Make sure the check the expiration date on the yeast package! Yeast that is too old may be dead and won't work.

Also, if the yeast does not begin to foam or bloom within 10 minutes of being added to the water in Step 1 of Making the Pizza Dough, it is probably dead. You'll need to start over with new, active yeast.

How To Proof Yeast
READ MORE:
How To Measure Flour for This Pizza Dough Recipe
Cup measurements can vary depending on how you are scooping the flour (we fluff the flour, lightly scoop it, and level with a knife). So I recommend using a kitchen scale to measure out the flour amounts by weight. This is the only way you'll get a consistently accurate measurement.

Overhead view of a pizza dough recipe and topped with cheese and mushrooms.
Simply Recipes / Annika Panikker
Is It Better To Let the Dough Rise Overnight?
You don’t have to let your pizza dough rise overnight—or up to 48 hours—in the refrigerator, but if you do, it will develop more flavor and air bubbles that will puff up when the pizza is cooked. (Some people fight over the slices with air bubbles.) Make sure to take the dough out of the refrigerator an hour before using it to bring it to room temperature.

Pizzas With Raw Ingredients
There are some toppings that should be cooked first before topping a pizza because they won’t cook fully before the pizza is done cooking. Raw meat should be fully cooked before adding it as a topping. Any vegetables that you don’t want to be raw on the cooked pizza such as onions, peppers, broccoli, or mushrooms, should be sautéed first.

Make-Ahead and Freezing Instructions
After the pizza dough has risen, you can freeze it to use later. Divide the dough in half (or the portion sizes you will be using to make your pizzas). Place on parchment paper or a lightly floured dish and place, uncovered, in the freezer for 15 to 20 minutes. Remove from the freezer and place in individual freezer bags, removing as much air as you can from the bags. Return to the freezer and store for up to 3 months.

Thaw the pizza dough in the refrigerator overnight or for 5 to 6 hours. Then let the dough sit at room temperature for 30 minutes before stretching it out in the next steps.

Throw a Pizza Party!
Spicy Sausage Pizza
Grandma Pizza
Pickle Pizza
Meat Lovers' Sheet Pan Pizza
Chicken Alfredo Pizza
From the Editors Of Simply Recipes
Print

Save
Homemade Pizza & Pizza Dough
Prep Time
30 mins
Cook Time
30 mins
Rise Time
90 mins
Total Time
2 hrs 30 mins
Servings
4 to 6 servings
Yield
2 10-inch pizzas
The dough for this pizza yields about 2 pounds, enough for two (1-pound) balls of dough.

Keep Screen Awake
Ingredients
For the pizza dough

1 1/2 cups (355 ml) warm water (105°F-115°F)
1 package (2 1/4 teaspoons) active dry yeast
3 3/4 cups (490g) bread flour
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil (omit if cooking pizza in a wood-fired pizza oven)
2 teaspoons kosher salt
1 teaspoon sugar
For making the pizza and toppings

Extra virgin olive oil
Cornmeal (to help slide the pizza onto the pizza stone)
Tomato sauce (smooth or pureed)
Firm mozzarella cheese, grated
Fresh soft mozzarella cheese, separated into small clumps
Fontina cheese, grated
Parmesan cheese, grated
Feta cheese, crumbled
Mushrooms, very thinly sliced if raw, otherwise first sautéed
Bell peppers, stems and seeds removed, very thinly sliced
Italian pepperoncini, thinly sliced
Italian sausage, cooked ahead and crumbled
Sliced black olives
Chopped fresh basil
Baby arugula, tossed in a little olive oil, added as pizza comes out of the oven
Pesto
Pepperoni, thinly sliced
Onions, thinly sliced raw or caramelized
Ham, thinly sliced
Method
Making the Pizza Dough
Proof the yeast:
Place the warm water in the large bowl of a heavy duty stand mixer. Sprinkle the yeast over the warm water and let it sit for 5 minutes until the yeast is dissolved.

After 5 minutes stir if the yeast hasn't dissolved completely. The yeast should begin to foam or bloom, indicating that the yeast is still active and alive.

(Note that if you are using "instant yeast" instead of "active yeast", no proofing is required. Just add to the flour in the next step.)

How To Proof Yeast
READ MORE:
Mixing a pizza dough recipe in the bowl of a stand mixer.
Sally Vargas
Make and knead the pizza dough:
Add the flour, salt, sugar, and olive oil, and using the mixing paddle attachment, mix on low speed for a minute. Then replace the mixing paddle with the dough hook attachment.

Knead the pizza dough on low to medium speed using the dough hook about 7 to 10 minutes.

If you don't have a mixer, you can mix the ingredients together and knead them by hand.

The dough should be a little sticky or tacky to the touch. If it's too wet, sprinkle in a little more flour.

Homemade pizza dough kneaded in a stand mixer.
Sally Vargas
Let the dough rise:
Spread a thin layer of olive oil over the inside of a large bowl. Place the pizza dough in the bowl and turn it around so that it gets coated with the oil.

At this point you can choose how long you want the dough to ferment and rise. A slow fermentation (24 hours in the fridge) will result in more complex flavors in the dough. A quick fermentation (1 1/2 hours in a warm place) will allow the dough to rise sufficiently to work with.

Cover the dough with plastic wrap.

For a quick rise, place the dough in a warm place (75°F to 85°F) for 1 1/2 hours.

For a medium rise, place the dough in a regular room temperature place (your kitchen counter will do fine) for 8 hours. For a longer rise, chill the dough in the refrigerator for 24 hours (no more than 48 hours).

The longer the rise (to a point) the better the flavor the crust will have.

Pizza dough in a glass bowl.
Sally Vargas
Pizza dough rising in a bowl.
Sally Vargas
Preparing the Pizzas
Preheat the pizza stone (or pizza pan or baking sheet):
Place a pizza stone on a rack in the lower third of your oven. Preheat the oven to 475°F for at least 30 minutes, preferably an hour. If you don't have a pizza stone, you can use a pizza pan or a thick baking sheet; you need something that will not warp at high temperatures.

Divide the dough into 2 balls:
Remove the plastic cover from the dough. Dust your hands with flour and push the dough down so it deflates a bit. Divide the dough in half.

Form 2 round balls of dough. Place each in its own bowl, cover with plastic, and let sit for 15 minutes (or up to 2 hours).

Two pizza dough balls.
Sally Vargas
Prep the toppings:
Prepare your desired toppings. Note that you are not going to want to load up each pizza with a lot of toppings as the crust will end up not crisp that way.

About a third a cup each of tomato sauce and cheese would be sufficient for one pizza. One to two mushrooms thinly sliced will cover a pizza.

Flatten the dough ball, and stretch out into a round:
Working one ball of dough at a time, take one ball of dough and flatten it with your hands on a lightly floured work surface.

Starting at the center and working outwards, use your fingertips to press the dough to 1/2-inch thick. Turn and stretch the dough until it will not stretch further.

Let the dough relax 5 minutes and then continue to stretch it until it reaches the desired diameter—10 to 12 inches.

Treat the dough gently!

You can also hold up the edges of the dough with your fingers, letting the dough hang and stretch, while working around the edges of the dough.

If a hole appears in your dough, place the dough on a floured surface and push the dough back together to seal the hole.

Use your palm to flatten the edge of the dough where it is thicker. Pinch the edges if you want to form a lip.

Pressing pizza dough into a circular shape.
Sally Vargas
Stretching homemade pizza dough.
Sally Vargas
Brush the dough top with olive oil:
Use your fingertips to press down and make dents along the surface of the dough to prevent bubbling. Brush the top of the dough with olive oil (to prevent it from getting soggy from the toppings). Let rest another 10 to 15 minutes.

Repeat with the second ball of dough.

Sprinkle the pizza peel with cornmeal, put flattened dough on top:
Lightly sprinkle your pizza peel (or flat baking sheet) with cornmeal. (The cornmeal will act as little ball bearings to help move the pizza from the pizza peel into the oven.)

Transfer one prepared flattened dough to the pizza peel.

If the dough has lost its shape in the transfer, lightly shape it to the desired dimensions.

Showing how to make pizza dough and place on a pizza peel.
Sally Vargas
Spread with tomato sauce and sprinkle with toppings:
Spoon on the tomato sauce, sprinkle with cheese, and place your desired toppings on the pizza. Be careful not to overload the pizza with too many toppings, or your pizza will be soggy.

Pizza ingredients spread on pizza dough.
Sally Vargas
Slide pizza into the oven:
Sprinkle some cornmeal on the baking stone in the oven (watch your hands, the oven is hot!). Gently shake the peel to see if the dough will easily slide; if not, gently lift up the edges of the pizza and add a bit more cornmeal.

Slide the pizza off the peel and onto the baking stone in the oven.

Transferring pizza dough onto pizza stone.
Sally Vargas
Bake:
Bake pizza in the 475°F oven, one at a time, until the crust is browned and the cheese is golden, about 10 to 15 minutes. If you want, toward the end of the cooking time, you can sprinkle on a little more cheese.

Did you love the recipe? Let us know with a rating and review!

Family Dinners
Comfort Food
Family Dinners
Italian
Pizzas
Nutrition Facts
(per serving)
322
Calories
4g
Fat
61g
Carbs
10g
Protein
 Show Full Nutrition Label
Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate. In cases where multiple ingredient alternatives are given, the first listed is calculated for nutrition. Garnishes and optional ingredients are not included.
Homemade Chicago-Style Deep Dish Pizza

Chicago-Style Deep Dish Pizza with Italian Sausage
70 mins
Cast iron pizza with parmesan and basil.

Cast Iron Skillet Pizza
36 mins
Homemade Pizza Sauce on a wooden spoon.

Easy Homemade Pizza Sauce
25 mins
Easy spicy sausage pizza with cheese

Spicy Sausage Pizza
14 mins
Overhead view of a bowl of spicy kimchi and pork belly stew.

Kimchi Jjigae (Korean Kimchi Stew)
55 mins
A loaf of garlic bread on a cutting board, partially cut into slices

The Best Garlic Bread
18 mins


Baked Chicken Marinara
40 mins
Pepperoni Pizza Hand Pies

Pepperoni Pizza Pockets
45 mins
Sheet Pan Pizza with Pepperoni

Meat Lovers' Sheet Pan Pizza
45 mins
Crispy crust and cheese on a pepperoni pizza made at home

Homemade Pepperoni Pizza
25 mins
Manicotti Removed From Casserole Dish Filled With Manicotti Using a Wooden Spoon

Cheese Stuffed Manicotti
80 mins
Chicken Alfredo Pizza Cut Into Slices With One Slice Slightly Removed From the Rest to Get a Cheesy Pool, All on a Cutting Board, and Next to the Board, a Blue and White Striped Kitchen Towel

Chicken Alfredo Pizza
60 mins
Pasta Fagioli ready to serve

Pasta e Fagioli
50 mins
A plate of Easy Italian Sausage Spaghetti

Easy Italian Sausage Spaghetti
45 mins
Slices of homemade stromboli on a cutting board

Easy Stuffed Stromboli
55 mins
pickle pizza on a cutting board

Pickle Pizza
55 mins
Ready to cook?
Sign up for our weekly newsletters!
Email Address
Enter your email
Sign up
Let's be friends!
Recipes
Quick & Easy
In the Kitchen
Buying Guides
Holidays & Seasons
About Us
Advertise
Terms of Service
Careers
Editorial Guidelines
Sweepstakes
Privacy Policy
Contact
Simply Recipes is part of the People Inc. publishing family.